# 08/02 FOCS (Phill)


## Foundations of Programming

Identifiers, variables, data and functions

Learning outcomes/key ideas
* Describe (and change) the type of data in Python
* Store data in variables using assignment statements
* Describe the difference between printing and returning values
* Define and call functions in Python


# No official textbook, but some handy references:

In case you want to dig deeper into any of these topics:

* W3Schools: https://www.w3schools.com/python/default.asp
* A textbook co-authored by Niema: https://stepik.org/course/56730/promo
* A book that also includes some material on Picobot: https://www.cs.hmc.edu/twiki/bin/view/CSforAll/

Later on, after we've had a chance to learn some more Python, this resource (suggested by Mentor Nola) is also helpful for 
checking your understanding.  It doesn't explain things&mdash;rather it just gives you practice problems:

* https://codingbat.com/python

# What is an identifier?

- The name of something.
- For example, the name of a variable:
  ```python
  my_number = 123
  ```
- Later, we'll learn of _other things_ that we can give names: functions, classes, modules; the same naming rules apply.
- Composed of letters, numbers and/or underscores starting with a letter or underscore.
- Case matters: ABC is different than abc

It's important to choose names thoughtfully:
* A well-chosen name can make a problem easier to solve
* A poorly-chosen name can make a problem harder to solve

We'll see examples of this as we go through our coding practice together.

# What is a keyword?

A word in the language that has a defined meaning.


Keywords may not be used as identifiers

```python

course = "CSE 8A"   # ok!
class = "CSE 8B"    # not ok; "class" is a keyword

```

# Case matters:

By case, we mean uppercase vs. lowercase, i.e. capital letters vs. small letters.

```python
if = 3    # not OK; if is a keyword in Python
IF = 4    # allowed, but weird; we typically don't use all upper case for python variables
iF = 5    # allowed, but also a bit weird
If  = 6   # allowed, but weird.
```

# What is a statement

What is a statement?

A statement is one unit of code.  

It is often (though not always) one line of code:
  
Here are examples of some simple one line statements in Python:
  
```python
import math             # one statement; imports the functions from the math module
print("Hello, World!")  # one statement; a function call to print
my_number = 123         # one statement; assigns the value 123 to the variable my_number
print("square root of ", my_number, "is", math.sqrt(my_number))   # one statement; a function call to print
```
 
You can separate multiple statements on a single line using semicolons.  (This is uncommon among Python programmers, but you will see it sometimes).

You can also sometimes have a single statement that spans multiple lines.


```python
x = 3; y=4; z=5   # Three assignment statements

# The next three lines are one statement; a single function call to print
print("x=",x,
      "y=",y,
      "z=",z) 
```

# What is a variable?

There are various definitions; each of these emphasizes different aspects of what it means to be a variable.

- A name associated with a value
- A name of a storage location that holds a value
- An association of a name of a storage location that holds a certain type of data.

```python
xyz = 123               # integer (abbreviated "int") variable xyz holding an initial value (initialization) of 123
abc = 2.3               # "float" variable abc holding an initial value of 2.3
is_mentor = True        # boolean variable (named for George Boole, abbreviated "bool") holding an initial value of True
message = “Hello World” # string variable (a string of characters, abbreviation "str") holding an initial value of “Hello World”
```

# Order of statements matter

In Python, statements are carried out top to bottom, in order
* *unless* there is something to change the order (we'll talk about those things a bit later; things like if/else, functions, loops, etc.)

This is true in most common programming languages (there are a few exceptions).

But it's *different* from how we may be used to working with variables in algebra class.

For instance, in an algebra class, if I write:

```
y = x + 1
x = 7
solve for y
```

You would all understand how to solve this:
* Plug in the value of y for x on line one (`y = 7 + 1`)
* Replace `7 + 1` with `8`
* Now we have `y = 8`

But that's not how variables work in Python.  The order of assignment statements matters:

This works in Python

```python
x = 7
y = x + 1
print("x = ",x)
```

This doesn't.  (We'll show this on the repl during class)

```python
y = x + 1
x = 7
print("x = ",x)
```

This also doesn't work:

```python
print("x = ",x)
x = 7
```

while this does:

```python
x = 7
print("x = ",x)
```

# The value of a variable can be changed

In Python, the value of a variable can be changed.

This is true in most common programming languages (there are a few exceptions), but different from how we may be used to variables in algebra class.


So here, what do you think will print?

```python
x = 7
print("x = ",x)
x = 9
print("x = ",x)
```

How about this one?

```python
x = 7
print("x = ",x)
x = x + 1
print("x = ",x)
```

# Functions

What is a Function?

OMG: here is a huge brain dump about functions.  

I'll try to explain each of these ideas during lecture with examples, but don't worry if you don't get all of this on the first try.

- A series of statements grouped together as a unit.
- Grouping has a purpose
- Grouping is named for that purpose

We need to understand the difference between function definitions and function calls.

- Code inside the function definition is called “the function body”
- A function body defines a “scope”
- Code inside function can be reused without retyping the code.
- The function is “called” to execute those statements
- The function often produces a result that is returned to the caller (via a `return` statement)
- The caller often captures the return result and stores into a variable.

Functions typically have inputs:
- Inputs are called: parameters (sometimes called arguments)
- There is a difference between "formal parameters" and "actual parameters"
- Some people use "parameters" vs. "arguments" to describe this difference

Functions attached to an object are sometimes called: methods
  - We won't need that information until later.  


# Example function

Used as a way to organize execution of a related group of statements to act
as a unit to perform a task.

- Function call performs that task.
- Function definition includes:
- name, parameters, function body - code
- Indenting defines a “scope”
- “first” and “second” are only known within the “add” function body


```python
def add (first, second):
   ''' adds parameters and send back result '''
   return first + second   # adds parameters and send back result

```

# Print vs Return:

```python
def squared (x):
   ''' returns the value of x times itself '''
   return x * x  

def print_squared (x):
   ''' prints the value of x times itself '''
   print(x * x) 
```

At first glance, these seem to be the same.  But as we'll see, they are quite different.

# Strings


# Expressions


# Types

