# SPIS 2022, FOCS, 08/05 (08:45-10AM)

# Announcements

Overview of today's calendar:

* 08:45-10AM: FOCS (this session)
* 10:15-11:30: Breadth / Depth: You may choose either:
  - Breadth: a lecture on a new topic (one that is interesting, but not essential to the rest of the SPIS program)
  - Depth: reviewing the material already covered to get a deeper understanding

Today's breadth lecture is by Niema, and discussses [Bioinformatics](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1c9ifVpexhycfEROZDKP4T-NK0nbj0f11FsKsr81yiug/edit#slide=id.p)

Today's depth lecture is by Phill, and will provide a review and more practice on the Python skills and concepts we've already learned.

# What is Iteration

Iteration is just a fancy computer science word for 'repeated steps'

or "looping"

We "iterate" over something by repeating the same steps on it multiple times.

Each time we go through the process, that's one "iteration"

We use this work iteration in connection with loops.

# Iterating over strings and lists

We can use a for loop to iterate over many kinds of collections in Python.

We've already seen iterating over a list:

[Repl](https://replit.com/@phtcon/spis2022-FOCS-0805#main.py)

```python
colleges = ["Revelle", "ERC", "Marshall", "Sixth", "Warren", "Muir"]

for college in colleges: 
  print(college)
```

Output:

```
Revelle
ERC
Marshall
Sixth
Warren
Muir
```

We can also iterate over the letters of a string:

[Repl](https://replit.com/@phtcon/spis2022-FOCS-0805-1#main.py)

```
campus = "UC San Diego"

for letter in campus:
  print(letter)
```

Output:

```
U
C
 
S
a
n
 
D
i
e
g
o
```

If we want to do this with a number, i.e. iterate over all of the digits of a number, we can convert it to a string:

```python
number = 8675309

number_as_string = str(number)

for c in number_as_string:
  print(c)
```

Output:

```
8
6
7
5
3
0
9
```

# A few basic algorithms

There a few basic algorithms that are helpful to know

One of them is called the "accumulator pattern", and it's how you add things up.

Suppose you have a list of numbers.  From [this document](https://ir.ucsd.edu/_files/stats-data/enrollment/ugcoll.pdf) I got the enrollments by college from 2016.  (If someone can find more up to date data, let me know)

Here's that data as a table:

| College | Enrollment |
|---------|------------|
| Revelle | 4766       |
| John Muir | 4683     |
| Thurgood Marshall | 4451 |
| Earl Warren | 4665 |
| Eleanor Roosevelt | 4702 | 
| Sixth | 4860 |

We can make a list of these numbers:

```python
enrollments = [4766, 4683, 4451, 4665, 4702, 4860]
```

We then might want to add all of those up.  According to the document, the total should be 28,127.

Full disclosure: there's an easy way [repl](https://replit.com/@phtcon/spis2022-FOCS-0805-3#main.py)

```python

enrollments = [4766, 4683, 4451, 4665, 4702, 4860]
total = sum(enrollments)
print(total)
```

Output:
```
28127
```

However, we want to show another way.    Why?
* The technique we are going to show illustrates how the built-in Python function `sum` works under the hood.
* There are times when you don't have the `sum` function handy (some programming languages don't have it)
* The accumulator pattern can be used for more than just forming a sum

